0.x to 1.x
==========

[dejafu-1.0.0.0][] is a super-major release which breaks compatibility with
[dejafu-0.x][] quite significantly, but brings with it support for bound
threads, and significantly improves memory usage in the general case.

Highlights reel:

- Most predicates now only need to keep around the failures, rather than all
  results.
- Support for bound threads (with [concurrency-1.3.0.0][]).
- The `ST` / `IO` interface duplication is gone, everything is now monadic.
- Function parameter order is closer to other testing libraries.
- Much improved API documentation.

See the changelogs for the full details.


`ST` and `IO` functions
-----------------------

There is only one set of functions now.  Testing bound threads requires being
able to fork actual threads, so testing with `ST` is no longer possible.  The
`ConcST` type is gone, there is only `ConcIO`.

For [dejafu][] change:

- `autocheckIO` to `autocheck`
- `dejafuIO` to `dejafu`
- `dejafusIO` to `dejafus`
- `autocheckWayIO` to `autocheckWay`
- `dejafuWayIO` to `dejafuWay`
- `dejafusWayIO` to `dejafusWay`
- `dejafuDiscardIO` to `dejafuDiscard`
- `runTestM` to `runTest`
- `runTestWayM` to `runTestWay`

If you relied on being able to get a pure result from the `ConcST` functions,
you can no longer do this.

For [hunit-dejafu][] and [tasty-dejafu][] change:

- `testAutoIO` to `testAuto`
- `testDejafuIO` to `testDejafu`
- `testDejafusIO` to `testDejafus`
- `testAutoWayIO` to `testAutoWay`
- `testDejafuWayIO` to `testDejafuWay`
- `testDejafusWayIO` to `testDejafusWay`
- `testDejafuDiscardIO` to `testDejafuDiscard`


Function parameter order
------------------------

Like [HUnit][], the monadic action to test is now the last parameter of the
testing functions.  This makes it convenient to write tests without needing to
define the action elsewhere.

For [dejafu][] change:

- `dejafu ma (s, p)` to `dejafu s p ma`
- `dejafus ma ps` to `dejafus ps ma`
- `dejafuWay way mem ma (s, p)` to `dejafuWay way mem s p ma`
- `dejafusWay way mem ma ps` to `dejafuWay way mem ps ma`
- `dejafuDiscard d way mem ma (s, p)` to `dejafuDiscard d way mem s p ma`

For [hunit-dejafu][] and [tasty-dejafu][] change:

- `testDejafu ma s p` to `testDejafu s p ma`
- `testDejafus ma ps` to `testDejafus ps ma`
- `testDejafuWay way mem ma s p` to `testDejafuWay way mem s p ma`
- `testDejafusWay way mem ma ps` to `testDejafusWay way mem ps ma`
- `testDejafuDiscard d way mem ma s p` to `testDejafuDiscard d way mem s p ma`


Predicates
----------

The `Predicate a` type is now an alias for `ProPredicate a a`, defined like so:

```haskell
data ProPredicate a b = ProPredicate
  { pdiscard :: Either Failure a -> Maybe Discard
  -- ^ Selectively discard results before computing the result.
  , peval :: [(Either Failure a, Trace)] -> Result b
  -- ^ Compute the result with the un-discarded results.
  }
```

If you use the predicate helper functions to construct a predicate, you do not
need to change anything (and should get a nice reduction in your resident memory
usage).  If you supply a function directly, you can recover the old behaviour
like so:

```haskell
old :: ([(Either Failure a, Trace)] -> Result a) -> ProPredicate a a
old p = ProPredicate
  { pdiscard = const Nothing
  , peval = p
  }
```

The `alwaysTrue2` helper function is gone.  If you use it, use `alwaysSameOn` or
`alwaysSameBy` instead.


Need help?
----------

- For general help talk to me in IRC (barrucadu in #haskell) or shoot me an
  email (mike@barrucadu.co.uk)
- For bugs, issues, or requests, please [file an issue][].

[dejafu-1.0.0.0]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/dejafu-1.0.0.0
[dejafu-0.x]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/dejafu-0.9.1.1
[concurrency-1.3.0.0]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/concurrency-1.3.0.0
[dejafu]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/dejafu
[hunit-dejafu]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/hunit-dejafu
[tasty-dejafu]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/tasty-dejafu
[HUnit]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/HUnit
[file an issue]: https://github.com/barrucadu/dejafu/issues/
